tutorial: nixos configurations on vm (#334)
NixOS/nix.dev: source/tutorials/nixos-configuration-on-vm.md

(nixos-vms)=

# NixOS virtual machines

One of the most important features of NixOS is the ability to configure the entire system declaratively, including packages to be installed, services to be run, as well as other settings and options.

NixOS configurations can be used to test and use NixOS using a virtual machine, independently of an installation on "bare metal" or your laptop.

A NixOS configuration is a Nix language function following the [NixOS module](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules) convention. 

## What will you learn?

This tutorial serves as an introduction creating virtual NixOS machines using Nix.
Virtual machines are a practical tool for debugging NixOS configurations.

## What do you need?

- A working installation of [Nix Package Manager](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/installation/installation.html) or [NixOS](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-installation).

> - Basic knowledge of the [Nix language](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/index.html).

Author: this causes a warning:
> "\nWarning, treated as error:\n/home/olaf/projects/nix.dev/source/tutorials/nixos-configuration-on-vm.md:20:more than one target found for 'myst' cross-reference install-nix: could be :std:ref:`Nix installation` or :std:doc:`Nix installation` [myst.ref]\nmake: *** [Makefile:53: html] Error 2\n"

Is there an alternative to a absolute path link?

> - Basic knowledge of the [Nix language](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/index.html).

Reviewer: ```
{ref}`Nix language <reading-nix-language>`
```

https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/cross-referencing.html#reference-roles

      firefox
      thunderbird
    ];
    initialPassword = "testpw";
  };

  system.stateVersion = "22.05";
}
```

## Creating a QEMU based virtual machine using a configuration

A virtual machine is created with the `nix-build` command.

To select `configuration.nix` in the working directory, specify the configuration file as an argument:
```shell-session
$ nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```
[^nixosrebuild]

This command builds the attribute `vm` utilizing the version of Nixpkgs as specified in the environment variable `NIX_PATH` and using the NixOS configuration as specified in the relative path.

## Running the virtual machine

The previous command creates a link with the name `result` in the working directory.
It links to the folder that contains the virtual machine.

```shell-session
$ ls -R ./result
```

    result:
    bin  system

    result/bin:
    run-nixos-vm

To run the virtual machine, execute:
```shell-session
$ ./result/bin/run-nixos-vm
```

This command opens a window that shows the boot process of the virtual machine and ends at the `gdm` login screen where you can log in as `alice` with the password `testpw`.

> Running the virtual machine will create a nixos.qcow2 file. This disk image file contains the dynamic state of the virtual machine. It can interfere with debugging as it keeps the state of previous runs, for example the user password. You should delete this file when you change the configuration.

Reviewer 2: Mention where the qcow2 file will be created?

Author: this is clear enough:
> Running the virtual machine will create a nixos.qcow2 file in the folder from which you start the virtual machine.

[^password]: Note that this may pose a security risk.
A more secure option is to encrypt a password using sha-512.
To create an encrypted password (here using "danger" as an example), execute:
    ```shell-session
    $ mkpasswd -m sha-512 danger
    ```

    Copy the output of `mkpasswd` into the user configuration and use the `initialHashedPassword` option.
    It should look something like this:
    ```nix
        initialHashedPassword = "$6$YLpneQLpnPxXpo1Y$mTZg26KMjWIBqP1N98LzeANb5rfMcC5t7a7Khf/gTB/rPCT4t4x2EgJJZmXkRWcGVW6ZEDMulsjTsXxD7BLZZ/";
    ```

[^nixpkgs]: Nixpkgs is the largest repository of Nix packages and NixOS modules.
The repository is hosted on GitHub and maintained by the community, with official backing from the NixOS Foundation.

[^nixosconf]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/b4093a24a868708c06d93e9edf13de0b3228b9c7/nixos/modules/installer/tools/tools.nix#L122-L226

> [^nixosrebuild]: On NixOS you can create a virtual machine using the command `nixos-rebuild build-vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix` which wraps the above command.

Reviewer: GitHub is bad at displaying diffs. This just moves the footnotes near to where they are used.

````suggestion
On NixOS, you can use the `nixos-generate-config` command to create a configuration file that contains some useful defaults and configuration suggestions.[^nixosconf]
You can create a NixOS configuration in your working directory:

```shell-session
nixos-generate-config --dir ./
```
[^nixosconf]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/b4093a24a868708c06d93e9edf13de0b3228b9c7/nixos/modules/installer/tools/tools.nix#L122-L226

In the working directory you will find two files: `configuration.nix` and `hardware-configuration.nix`.

The `hardware-configuration.nix` file is specific to the hardware the `nix-generate-config` is being run on.
We can ignore that file for this tutorial because it has no effect inside a virtual machine.

The `configuration.nix` file contains various suggestions for the initial setup of a desktop computer.
Without comments the configuration file contains the following content:
```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  imports =
    [
      ./hardware-configuration.nix
    ];

  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

  system.stateVersion = "22.05";
}
```

In this tutorial we focus on testing NixOS configurations on a virtual machine, in these cases you can remove the `hardware-configuration.nix` import.

Changes to the configuration need to be positioned inside the curly bracket.[^bracket]

To be able to log in, you must uncomment the section that specifies the user `alice`, or add the following lines:
```nix
  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ];
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox
      thunderbird
    ];
  };
```

Additionally, you need to specify a password for this user.
An insecure[^password] solution is to specify an plain text password by adding the `initialPassword` option to the user configuration:
```nix
    initialPassword = "testpw";
```

The complete `configuration.nix` file now looks like this:
```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ]; # Enable ‘sudo’ for the user.
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox
      thunderbird
    ];
    initialPassword = "testpw";
  };

  system.stateVersion = "22.05";
}
```

## Creating a QEMU based virtual machine using a configuration

A virtual machine is created with the `nix-build` command.

To select `configuration.nix` in the working directory, specify the configuration file as an argument:[^nixosrebuild]

```shell-session
$ nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```

[^nixosrebuild]: On NixOS you can create a virtual machine using the command `nixos-rebuild build-vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix` which wraps the command shown.

This command builds the attribute `vm` utilizing the version of Nixpkgs as specified in the environment variable `NIX_PATH` and using the NixOS configuration as specified in the relative path.

## Running the virtual machine

The previous command creates a link with the name `result` in the working directory.
It links to the folder that contains the virtual machine.

```shell-session
$ ls -R ./result
```

    result:
    bin  system

    result/bin:
    run-nixos-vm

To run the virtual machine, execute:
```shell-session
$ ./result/bin/run-nixos-vm
```

This command opens a window that shows the boot process of the virtual machine and ends at the `gdm` login screen where you can log in as `alice` with the password `testpw`.

Running the virtual machine will create a nixos.qcow2 file. This disk image file contains the dynamic state of the virtual machine. It can interfere with debugging as it keeps the state of previous runs, for example the user password. You should delete this file when you change the configuration.

[^bracket]: As a reminder `configuration.nix` contains a function that returns an [attribute set](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/values.html#attribute-set) that follows the convention of a [module](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules). In the attribute set you describe how you want your NixOS system configured. 

[^password]: Note that this may pose a security risk.
A more secure option is to encrypt a password using sha-512.
To create an encrypted password (here using "danger" as an example), execute:
    ```shell-session
    $ mkpasswd -m sha-512 danger
    ```

    Copy the output of `mkpasswd` into the user configuration and use the `initialHashedPassword` option.
    It should look something like this:
    ```nix
        initialHashedPassword = "$6$YLpneQLpnPxXpo1Y$mTZg26KMjWIBqP1N98LzeANb5rfMcC5t7a7Khf/gTB/rPCT4t4x2EgJJZmXkRWcGVW6ZEDMulsjTsXxD7BLZZ/";
    ```

[^nixpkgs]: Nixpkgs is the largest repository of Nix packages and NixOS modules.
The repository is hosted on GitHub and maintained by the community, with official backing from the NixOS Foundation.
````

> [^nixosrebuild]: On NixOS you can create a virtual machine using the command `nixos-rebuild build-vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix` which wraps the above command.

Reviewer: GitHub is bad at displaying diffs. This just moves the footnotes near to where they are used.

````suggestion
On NixOS, you can use the `nixos-generate-config` command to create a configuration file that contains some useful defaults and configuration suggestions.[^nixosconf]
You can create a NixOS configuration in your working directory:

```shell-session
nixos-generate-config --dir ./
```
[^nixosconf]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/b4093a24a868708c06d93e9edf13de0b3228b9c7/nixos/modules/installer/tools/tools.nix#L122-L226

In the working directory you will find two files: `configuration.nix` and `hardware-configuration.nix`.

The `hardware-configuration.nix` file is specific to the hardware the `nix-generate-config` is being run on.
We can ignore that file for this tutorial because it has no effect inside a virtual machine.

The `configuration.nix` file contains various suggestions for the initial setup of a desktop computer.
Without comments the configuration file contains the following content:
```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  imports =
    [
      ./hardware-configuration.nix
    ];

  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

  system.stateVersion = "22.05";
}
```

In this tutorial we focus on testing NixOS configurations on a virtual machine, in these cases you can remove the `hardware-configuration.nix` import.

Changes to the configuration need to be positioned inside the curly bracket.[^bracket]

To be able to log in, you must uncomment the section that specifies the user `alice`, or add the following lines:
```nix
  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ];
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox
      thunderbird
    ];
  };
```

Additionally, you need to specify a password for this user.
An insecure[^password] solution is to specify an plain text password by adding the `initialPassword` option to the user configuration:
```nix
    initialPassword = "testpw";
```

The complete `configuration.nix` file now looks like this:
```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ]; # Enable ‘sudo’ for the user.
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox
      thunderbird
    ];
    initialPassword = "testpw";
  };

  system.stateVersion = "22.05";
}
```

## Creating a QEMU based virtual machine using a configuration

A virtual machine is created with the `nix-build` command.

To select `configuration.nix` in the working directory, specify the configuration file as an argument:[^nixosrebuild]

```shell-session
$ nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```

[^nixosrebuild]: On NixOS you can create a virtual machine using the command `nixos-rebuild build-vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix` which wraps the command shown.

This command builds the attribute `vm` utilizing the version of Nixpkgs as specified in the environment variable `NIX_PATH` and using the NixOS configuration as specified in the relative path.

## Running the virtual machine

The previous command creates a link with the name `result` in the working directory.
It links to the folder that contains the virtual machine.

```shell-session
$ ls -R ./result
```

    result:
    bin  system

    result/bin:
    run-nixos-vm

To run the virtual machine, execute:
```shell-session
$ ./result/bin/run-nixos-vm
```

This command opens a window that shows the boot process of the virtual machine and ends at the `gdm` login screen where you can log in as `alice` with the password `testpw`.

Running the virtual machine will create a nixos.qcow2 file. This disk image file contains the dynamic state of the virtual machine. It can interfere with debugging as it keeps the state of previous runs, for example the user password. You should delete this file when you change the configuration.

[^bracket]: As a reminder `configuration.nix` contains a function that returns an [attribute set](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/values.html#attribute-set) that follows the convention of a [module](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules). In the attribute set you describe how you want your NixOS system configured. 

[^password]: Note that this may pose a security risk.
A more secure option is to encrypt a password using sha-512.
To create an encrypted password (here using "danger" as an example), execute:
    ```shell-session
    $ mkpasswd -m sha-512 danger
    ```

    Copy the output of `mkpasswd` into the user configuration and use the `initialHashedPassword` option.
    It should look something like this:
    ```nix
        initialHashedPassword = "$6$YLpneQLpnPxXpo1Y$mTZg26KMjWIBqP1N98LzeANb5rfMcC5t7a7Khf/gTB/rPCT4t4x2EgJJZmXkRWcGVW6ZEDMulsjTsXxD7BLZZ/";
    ```

[^nixpkgs]: Nixpkgs is the largest repository of Nix packages and NixOS modules.
The repository is hosted on GitHub and maintained by the community, with official backing from the NixOS Foundation.
````

(nixos-vms)=

# NixOS virtual machines

One of the most important features of NixOS is the ability to configure the entire system declaratively, including packages to be installed, services to be run, as well as other settings and options.

NixOS configurations can be used to test and use NixOS using a virtual machine, independent of an installation on a "bare metal" computer.

:::{.important}
A NixOS configuration is a Nix language function following the [NixOS module](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules) convention. 
:::

## What will you learn?

This tutorial serves as an introduction creating NixOS virtual machines.
Virtual machines are a practical tool for debugging NixOS configurations.

## What do you need?

> - A working [Nix installation](install-nix) or [NixOS](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-installation)

Reviewer: This does not work on macOS because evaluating the configuration already fails (even if the QEMU stuff would work, which I doubt):
```
error: assertion '(stdenv).isLinux' failed

       at /nix/store/gfhjcl9ck77gk7zw21sk13pw7zw4307g-78342239aac6382af25986219ffb163ba79b155a/pkgs/os-specific/linux/kernel/generic.nix:71:1:

           70|
           71| assert stdenv.isLinux;
             | ^
           72|
(use '--show-trace' to show detailed location information)
```

```suggestion
- A working [Nix installation](install-nix) on Linux, or [NixOS](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-installation)
```

Author: Thanks for testing on an obscure OS :-P 
lets see how this develops https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/108984

(nixos-vms)=

# NixOS virtual machines

One of the most important features of NixOS is the ability to configure the entire system declaratively, including packages to be installed, services to be run, as well as other settings and options.

NixOS configurations can be used to test and use NixOS using a virtual machine, independently of an installation on "bare metal" or your laptop.

> A NixOS configuration is a Nix language function following the [NixOS module](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules) convention. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{.important}
A NixOS configuration is a Nix language function following the [NixOS module](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules) convention. 
:::
```

## What will you learn?

This tutorial serves as an introduction creating virtual NixOS machines using Nix.
Virtual machines are a practical tool for debugging NixOS configurations.

## What do you need?

- A working installation of [Nix Package Manager](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/installation/installation.html) or [NixOS](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-installation).
- Basic knowledge of the [Nix language](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/index.html).

## Starting from the default NixOS configuration

On NixOS, by default, the configuration file is located at `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`.
For CLI commands that use a configuration, its file path can be specified.
In this tutorial we use this strategy, because the goal is not to install or update the current NixOS, but to debug a specific configuration.

On NixOS, you can use the `nixos-generate-config` command to create a configuration file that contains some useful defaults and configuration suggestions.[^nixosconf]
You can create a NixOS configuration in your working directory:
```shell-session
nixos-generate-config --dir ./
```

> In the working directory you will find two files: `configuration.nix` and `hardware-configuration.nix`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the working directory you will then find two files: `configuration.nix` and `hardware-configuration.nix`.
```

> The `hardware-configuration.nix` file is specific to the hardware the `nix-generate-config` is being run on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`hardware-configuration.nix` is specific to the hardware `nix-generate-config` is being run on.
```

We can ignore that file for this tutorial because it has no effect inside a virtual machine.

The `configuration.nix` file contains various suggestions for the initial setup of a desktop computer.
Without comments the configuration file contains the following content:
```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{

>   imports =
>     [
>       ./hardware-configuration.nix
>     ];

Reviewer: Not a mandatory change, because it's not entirely true to your statement of the file without comments, but it makes it easier to describe the changes down the line.
```suggestion
  imports =  [ ./hardware-configuration.nix ];
```

  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

  system.stateVersion = "22.05";
}

> ```

Reviewer: Nice. At some point I wish we had that for a NixOS onboarding tutorial.

> In this tutorial we focus on testing NixOS configurations on a virtual machine, in these cases you can remove the `hardware-configuration.nix` import.

Reviewer: Maybe we can make this more explicit somehow. Not sure about the syntax, we can fix this when polish-editing.

````suggestion
In this tutorial we focus on testing NixOS configurations on a virtual machine.
Therefore we will remove the reference to `hardware-configuration.nix`:

```diff
-  imports =  [ ./hardware-configuration.nix ];
```
````

> Changes to the configuration need to be positioned inside the curly bracket.[^bracket]

Reviewer: Then we don't need generic statements or reminders.

Author: i am not sure about that: https://discourse.nixos.org/t/how-to-make-automatic-upgrades-in-configuration-nix-work/20254/6

> To be able to log in, you must uncomment the section that specifies the user `alice`, or add the following lines:

Reviewer: Don't present options, tell the reader what to do exactly.

Author: (thats a nix vs nixos situation)

Author: moved the difference to a footnote

```nix
  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ];
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox
      thunderbird
    ];
  };
```

Additionally, you need to specify a password for this user.

> An insecure[^password] solution is to specify an plain text password by adding the `initialPassword` option to the user configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the purpose of demonstration only, we use specify an insecure, plain text password by adding the `initialPassword` option to the user configuration:[^password]
```

```nix

>     initialPassword = "testpw";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
initialPassword = "testpw";
```

Or use a `diff` markup.

```

The complete `configuration.nix` file now looks like this:
```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ]; # Enable ‘sudo’ for the user.
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox
      thunderbird
    ];
    initialPassword = "testpw";
  };

  system.stateVersion = "22.05";
}
```

## Creating a QEMU based virtual machine using a configuration

A virtual machine is created with the `nix-build` command.

> To select `configuration.nix` in the working directory, specify the configuration file as an argument:
> ```shell-session
> $ nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
> ```
> [^nixosrebuild]

Reviewer: ````suggestion
To select `configuration.nix` in the working directory, specify the configuration file as an argument:[^nixosrebuild]

```shell-session
nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```

````

I think otherwise this will render weird.

> This command builds the attribute `vm` utilizing the version of Nixpkgs as specified in the environment variable `NIX_PATH` and using the NixOS configuration as specified in the relative path.

Reviewer: I'm on the fence about `NIX_PATH`. I'd like to avoid it entirely, but it of course makes the examples super lengthy.

@domenkozar @infinisil do you also prefer to specify the commit hash? Related: https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/issues/336

Author: > `nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix` 

how to do this line without <nixpkgs> reference to `NIX_PATH`?

Reviewer: I'll be damned, there is indeed no straightforward way. There is a hacky but pure way, but I doubt we should inflict this on anyone.

```console
nix-build <(nix-prefetch-url --print-path https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/78342239aac6382af25986219ffb163ba79b155a)/nixos -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```

Reviewer 3: A simpler way is
```
nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm \
  -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix \
  -I nixpkgs=https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tarball/78342239aac6382af25986219ffb163ba79b155a
```

Or even this impure version:

```
nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm \
  -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix \
  -I nixpkgs=channel:nixos-unstable
```

This fetches the channel from https://channels.nixos.org/

Author: @infinisil 

> -I nixpkgs=channel:nixos-unstable

is this documented somewhere?

## Running the virtual machine

The previous command creates a link with the name `result` in the working directory.
It links to the folder that contains the virtual machine.

```shell-session

> $ ls -R ./result

Reviewer: Do not prepend shell prompts, otherwise it's either not clear whether (or incurs additional cognitive overhead) to exclude it when copy-pasting.

```suggestion
ls -R ./result
```

```

    result:
    bin  system

    result/bin:
    run-nixos-vm

To run the virtual machine, execute:
```shell-session

> $ ./result/bin/run-nixos-vm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
./result/bin/run-nixos-vm
```

```

This command opens a window that shows the boot process of the virtual machine and ends at the `gdm` login screen where you can log in as `alice` with the password `testpw`.

> Running the virtual machine will create a nixos.qcow2 file in the folder from which you start the virtual machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running the virtual machine will create a `nixos.qcow2` file in the folder from which you start the virtual machine.
```

This disk image file contains the dynamic state of the virtual machine.
It can interfere with debugging as it keeps the state of previous runs, for example the user password.
You should delete this file when you change the configuration.

[^bracket]: As a reminder `configuration.nix` contains a function that returns an [attribute set](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/values.html#attribute-set) that follows the convention of a [module](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules).
In the attribute set you describe how you want your NixOS system configured.

> [^password]: Note that this may pose a security risk.
> A more secure option is to encrypt a password using sha-512.
> To create an encrypted password (here using "danger" as an example), execute:
>     ```shell-session
>     $ mkpasswd -m sha-512 danger
>     ```
> 
>     Copy the output of `mkpasswd` into the user configuration and use the `initialHashedPassword` option.
>     It should look something like this:
>     ```nix
>         initialHashedPassword = "$6$YLpneQLpnPxXpo1Y$mTZg26KMjWIBqP1N98LzeANb5rfMcC5t7a7Khf/gTB/rPCT4t4x2EgJJZmXkRWcGVW6ZEDMulsjTsXxD7BLZZ/";
>     ```

Reviewer: Instead of explaining this (which is not relevant for the purpose of learning and will merely distract from the learning objective) I think a note should be enough that in actual practice you may do something else, and link to the relevant documentation. For example (imagine correct links to the manual):

````suggestion
[^password]: Warning: Do not use plain text passwords outside of this example unless you know what you are doing. See [`initialHashedPassword`] or [`ssh.authorizedKeys`] for more secure alternatives.
````

[^nixpkgs]: Nixpkgs is the largest repository of Nix packages and NixOS modules.
The repository is hosted on GitHub and maintained by the community, with official backing from the NixOS Foundation.

> [^nixosconf]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/b4093a24a868708c06d93e9edf13de0b3228b9c7/nixos/modules/installer/tools/tools.nix#L122-L226

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^nixosconf]: This [configuration template](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/b4093a24a868708c06d93e9edf13de0b3228b9c7/nixos/modules/installer/tools/tools.nix#L122-L226) is used.
```

> [^nixosrebuild]: On NixOS you can create a virtual machine using the command `nixos-rebuild build-vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix` which wraps the above command.

Reviewer: Please move footnotes to [close where they are used](https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md?plain=1#L181-L185). Easier to read and maintain the source.

> [^nixosrebuild]: On NixOS you can create a virtual machine using the command `nixos-rebuild build-vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix` which wraps the above command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^nixosrebuild]: On NixOS you can create a virtual machine using `nixos-rebuild build-vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix`, which wraps the original command.
```

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

  system.stateVersion = "22.05";
}
```

In this tutorial we focus on testing NixOS configurations on a virtual machine.
Therefore we will remove the reference to `hardware-configuration.nix`:

```diff
-  imports =  [ ./hardware-configuration.nix ];
```

Changes to the configuration need to be positioned inside the curly bracket.[^bracket]

[^bracket]: As a reminder `configuration.nix` contains a function that returns an [attribute set](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/values.html#attribute-set) that follows the convention of a [module](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules).
In the attribute set you describe how you want your NixOS system configured.

To be able to log in add the following lines:[^user]

[^user]: On NixOS your configuration generated using `nix-generate-config` contains the user configuration commented out.

```nix
  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ];
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox

>       thunderbird

Author: This is the standard configuration generated by `nixos-generate-config`.
I on purpose use this as the basis for this tutorial.

>       thunderbird

Author: I subscribe to the issue to follow up if there is a change on this.

    ];
  };
```

Additionally, you need to specify a password for this user.
For the purpose of demonstration only, we use specify an insecure, plain text password by adding the `initialPassword` option to the user configuration:[^password]

[^password]: Warning: Do not use plain text passwords outside of this example unless you know what you are doing. See [`initialHashedPassword`] or [`ssh.authorizedKeys`] for more secure alternatives.

```nix
initialPassword = "testpw";
```

The complete `configuration.nix` file now looks like this:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;

>   services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

Reviewer: Just an idea, so this is optional: To get a much smaller image one may want to remove the GUI (and Firefox/Thunderbird as well). Since we're already expecting terminal skills, it may be just as good to present a barebones machine with some random terminal program to show that Nix actually makes it available.

  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ]; # Enable ‘sudo’ for the user.
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox
      thunderbird
    ];
    initialPassword = "testpw";
  };

  system.stateVersion = "22.05";
}
```

## Creating a QEMU based virtual machine using a configuration

A virtual machine is created with the `nix-build` command.

To select `configuration.nix` in the working directory, specify the configuration file as an argument:[^nixosrebuild]

[^nixosrebuild]: On NixOS you can create a virtual machine using `nixos-rebuild build-vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix`, which wraps the original command.

> ```shell-session
> nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
> ```

Reviewer: Since [you asked on Discourse](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/where-is-a-vm-documented/22258/2) about this being documented, we may want to add some explanation in case someone wants to know more. It's irrelevant for continuing the tutorial, so it should be an optional read.

````suggestion
```shell-session
nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```
<details><summary>Detailed explanation</summary>

TODO: explain `<nixpkgs/nixos>`

arguments of nix-build: https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-build.html
search paths: https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/env-common.html#env-NIX_PATH

TODO: explain what `-A` does (https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-attr)

TODO: explain where `vm` comes from (https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/7c164f4bea71d74d98780ab7be4f9105630a2eba/nixos/default.nix#L19)

TODO:  explain what `-I` does here (https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-I)

</details>
````

```nix
initialPassword = "testpw";
```

This tutorial focuses on testing NixOS configurations on a virtual machine.
Therefore you will remove the reference to `hardware-configuration.nix`:

```diff
-  imports =  [ ./hardware-configuration.nix ];
```

The complete `configuration.nix` file now looks like this:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ]; # Enable ‘sudo’ for the user.
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox
      thunderbird
    ];
    initialPassword = "testpw";
  };

  system.stateVersion = "22.11";
}
```

## Creating a QEMU based virtual machine using a configuration

A virtual machine is created with the `nix-build` command.

To select `configuration.nix` in the working directory, specify the configuration file as an argument:

```shell-session
nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm \
-I nixpkgs=channel:nixos-22.11 \
-I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```

> This command builds the attribute `vm` using the version of Nixpkgs as using the [short form for channels](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html#env-NIX_PATH) and using the NixOS configuration as specified in the relative path.

Author: i think this is related https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/pull/303

<details><summary> Detailed explanation </summary>

> The first optional argument of [nix-build](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-build.html) is a path to the derivation that you want to build.

Author: ```
The first optional argument of [nix-build](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-build.html) is a path to the derivation that you want to build.
```

To build the virtual machine attribute you want to make use of the attributes provided by NixOS in the Nixpkgs, therefore you use `'<nixpkgs/nixos>'`.
The [-I](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-I) option allows you to set search paths.
In this example, you use it to explicitly set `nixpkgs` to refer to a specific version of NixOS and to set `nix-config` to the configuration.nix file in your current folder.
The [-A](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-attr) option allows you to specify which attribute to build.
To build the virtual machine, you choose the attribute `vm`.
The `vm` attribute is inhereted from `eval.config.system.build` as defined in the [nixos/default.nix](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/7c164f4bea71d74d98780ab7be4f9105630a2eba/nixos/default.nix#L19).

:::{admonition} NixOS
On NixOS you usually have a `$NIX_PATH` environment variable set up. You can use your current version of nixpkgs to build the virtual machine with this simpler command:[^nixosrebuild]
```shell-session
nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```
:::

</details>

> [^nixosrebuild]: On NixOS you can create a virtual machine using `nixos-rebuild build-vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix`, which wraps the original command. its usage is mentioned [here](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-changing-config).

Author: the tutorial is not directed to nixos users only so the nixos command cannot not be used directly

## Running the virtual machine

The previous command creates a link with the name `result` in the working directory.
It links to the folder that contains the virtual machine.

```shell-session
ls -R ./result
```

```console
    result:
    bin  system

    result/bin:
    run-nixos-vm
```

To run the virtual machine, execute:

```shell-session
./result/bin/run-nixos-vm
```

This command opens a window that shows the boot process of the virtual machine and ends at the `gdm` login screen where you can log in as `alice` with the password `testpw`.

Running the virtual machine will create a `nixos.qcow2` file in the folder from which you start the virtual machine.
This disk image file contains the dynamic state of the virtual machine.
It can interfere with debugging as it keeps the state of previous runs, for example the user password.
You should delete this file when you change the configuration.

# References

> - Nix manual: [`nix-build` man page](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-build.html).
> - Nix manual: [common cli options](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html).
> - Nix manual: [`NIX_PATH` environment variable](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/env-common.html#env-NIX_PATH).
> - NixOS Manual: [NixOS Configuration](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#ch-configuration).
> - NixOS Manual: [Modules](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules).
> - NixOS Manual Reference: [Options](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/options.html).
> - NixOS Manual: [NixOS cli](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-changing-config).
> - Wiki entry: [nixos-rebuild build-vm](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/NixOS:nixos-rebuild_build-vm).
> - Source code: [configuration template](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/b4093a24a868708c06d93e9edf13de0b3228b9c7/nixos/modules/installer/tools/tools.nix#L122-L226).
> - Source code: [vm attribute](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/default.nix).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Nix manual: `nix-build`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-build.html).
- [Nix manual: Common command-line options](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html).
- [Nix manual: `NIX_PATH` environment variable](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/env-common.html#env-NIX_PATH).
- [NixOS Manual: NixOS Configuration](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#ch-configuration).
- [NixOS Manual: Modules](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-writing-modules).
- [NixOS Manual: Configuration Options Reference](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/options.html).
- [NixOS Manual: NixOS command line interface](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-changing-config).
- [NixOS Wiki: `nixos-rebuild build-vm`](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/NixOS:nixos-rebuild_build-vm).
```

I think we don't have to go into depth on the source code. The reference manuals are more important, and that's enough information as it is. I also don't think it's super valuable to look at the implementation at this point and in this context, except for curiosity.

Author: I like to keep the links to the source code because those aspects are not documented. they might be better documented in the future.

Reviewer: True, agreed. Maybe we can quickly find a reasonable way to reference these things in words, e.g.

```
NixOS source code: `vm` attribute in `default.nix`
```

and similarly for the configuration template: project resource, what it is (human-readable), where it lived (path relative to project root)

Author: done

```diff
-  imports =  [ ./hardware-configuration.nix ];
```

The complete `configuration.nix` file now looks like this:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

  services.xserver.enable = true;

  services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

  users.users.alice = {
    isNormalUser = true;
    extraGroups = [ "wheel" ]; # Enable ‘sudo’ for the user.
    packages = with pkgs; [
      firefox
      tree
    ];
    initialPassword = "testpw";
  };

  system.stateVersion = "22.11";
}
```

## Creating a QEMU based virtual machine using a configuration

A virtual machine is created with the `nix-build` command.

To select `configuration.nix` in the working directory, specify the configuration file on the command line:

```shell-session
nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm \
-I nixpkgs=channel:nixos-22.11 \
-I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```

This command builds the attribute `vm` from the `nixos-22.11` release of NixOS, using the NixOS configuration as specified in the relative path.

<details><summary> Detailed explanation </summary>

> The first optional argument of [nix-build](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-build.html) is a path to the derivation to be build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first optional argument of [`nix-build`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-build.html) is a path to the derivation to be build.
```

> The first optional argument of [`nix-build`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-build.html) is a path to the derivation to be build.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The first optional argument of [`nix-build`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-build.html) is a path to the derivation to be built.
```

With `'<nixpkgs>'` Nix is instructed to resolve the search path defined with the [`NIX_PATH` environment variable](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/env-common.html#env-NIX_PATH) or the [`-I` option](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/unstable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-I).
The virtual machine setup is provided by NixOS, which is part of the `nixpkgs` repository, therefore we use `'<nixpkgs/nixos>'`.

> The [-A option](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-attr) specifies the attribute to pick from the provided [Nix expression `<nixpkgs>`](https://nix.dev/tutorials/nix-language#search-path).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`-A` option](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-attr) specifies the attribute to pick from the provided [Nix expression `<nixpkgs>`](https://nix.dev/tutorials/nix-language#search-path).
```

No idea how to do that [correctly with MyST](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/cross-referencing.html#reference-roles), but this should not be a plain URL to nix.dev. Let Sphinx do the heavy lifting.

Author: I only get myst links working by adding a explicit target to the nix-language tutorial like nix-tut-search-path because the heading is the same as in anti-patterns/language.md

Reviewer: That's fine, `search-path-tutorial` is probably good. Global namespaces should be forbidden by law, sigh.

> To build the virtual machine, you choose the `vm` attribute as defined in [nixos/default.nix](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/7c164f4bea71d74d98780ab7be4f9105630a2eba/nixos/default.nix#L19).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build the virtual machine, you choose the `vm` attribute as defined in [`nixos/default.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/7c164f4bea71d74d98780ab7be4f9105630a2eba/nixos/default.nix#L19).
```

> The [-I option](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-I) adds search paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`-I` option](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-I) adds search paths.
```

## What do you need?

- A working [Nix installation](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/installation/installation.html) on Linux, or [NixOS](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-installation)
- Basic knowledge of the [Nix language](reading-nix-language)

## Starting from the default NixOS configuration

On NixOS, by default, the configuration file is located at `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`.

> For commands that use a configuration file, such as `nixos-rebuild`, the configuration file's path can be specified.[^path]

Author: we need the footnote because we do not have a documentation to which we can link precisely. Without further information `can be specified` is derailing by itself.

> For commands that use a configuration file, such as `nixos-rebuild`, the configuration file's path can be specified.[^path]

Reviewer: Maybe we can instead restructure the approach altogether. I like the idea how you start with the default configuration file and work your way to building the VM. What about something along these lines:

> On NixOS, by default, the configuration file is located at `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`.
> In this tutorial we do not to install or update the current NixOS, but want to run a specific configuration in a virtual machine.
> 
> On NixOS, you can use the `nixos-generate-config` command to create a configuration file that contains some useful defaults and configuration suggestions.
> Create a NixOS configuration in your working directory:

BTW does `nixos-generate-config` even exist outside of NixOS these days? If not, you must provide an alternative. Or maybe better, take the case that always works (i.e. on any Linux) by default (e.g. present a finished minimal configuration) and make a footnote to mention `nixos-generate-config`. Although, thinking about it, even that doesn't really relate to what we're doing here, so we may as well leave it out. You know, if you start talking about `nixos-generate-config`, you suddenly have to perform additional steps just to get to a minimal configuration instead of just copy-pasting your sample.

Let's rather use that reader time to help them understand the sample.

> For commands that use a configuration file, such as `nixos-rebuild`, the configuration file's path can be specified.[^path]

Reviewer: Really sorry for the long editing route, but I'd rather have multiple very short, on-point tutorials or guide solving one specific problem instead of covering all kinds of nice-to-know things that readers will be distracted by or won't care about.

In fact, there should be no nice-to-know things in the first place. All of the use cases should be explicit and discoverable from introductory material. We'll hopefully work on this at some point.

> For commands that use a configuration file, such as `nixos-rebuild`, the configuration file's path can be specified.[^path]

Reviewer: We discussed the mismatch between tutorial/guide work and reference work [yesterday on the docs team](https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/issues/296#issuecomment-1271236970). Yeah, it's painful to get something done in terms of covering user stories if reference documentation is severely lacking, and at the very least it produces constant distraction. Still we should make some progress at all, to make Nix useful without users having to stick their head into random details.

> For commands that use a configuration file, such as `nixos-rebuild`, the configuration file's path can be specified.[^path]

Author: It's a footnote ready to be removed when references are ready

A virtual machine is created with the `nix-build` command.

To select `configuration.nix` in the working directory, specify the configuration file as an argument:

```shell-session
nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm \
-I nixpkgs=channel:nixos-22.11 \
-I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```

This command builds the attribute `vm` using the version of Nixpkgs as using the [short form for channels]((https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html)) and using the NixOS configuration as specified in the relative path.

:::{note}

> It is common to a `$NIX_PATH` environment variable set up so you can use your current version of nixpkgs to build the virtual machine:[^nixosrebuild]

Reviewer: Now that this degraded to an option, and we shouldn't leave options in tutorials (remember, they are cognitive overhead for learners under cognitive load), and we discourage `NIX_PATH` anyway, we may as well leave it out entirely.

nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```

:::{note}
On systems that do not have a `$NIX_PATH` environment variable set up as recommended in [the pinning tutorial](pinning-nixpkgs) you use:

```shell-session
nix-build $(nix-prefetch-url --print-path --unpack https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/nixos-22.11.tar.gz | tail -n 1)/nixos -A vm -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix

nix-prefetcch-url downloads the archive of Nixpkgs, unpacks the archive, and returns the nix store path. This path is then used for by nix-build command to build the virtual machine.
```

> :::

Reviewer: I don't know. No, not really. I was just messing around to figure out if it can be done. This is not practical at all (if only because of re-downloading) and just distracts from the purpose. But what we can reasonably do is make the search path explicit using another search path entry. It's a bit messy still, but that's how things are in Nix 2.x...

```console
nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm -I https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tarball/78342239aac6382af25986219ffb163ba79b155a -I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```

And possibly break it down into multiple lines so it's easier to grasp:

```console
nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm \
-I https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tarball/78342239aac6382af25986219ffb163ba79b155a \
-I nixos-config=./configuration.nix
```

On systems that do not have a `$NIX_PATH` environment variable set up as recommended in [the pinning tutorial](pinning-nixpkgs) you use:

```shell-session
nix-build '<nixpkgs/nixos>' -A vm \

> -I https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/nixos-22.11.tar.gz \

Reviewer: That should definitely be a pinned revision. Reason: https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/issues/336
